Summary: A new study reveals researchers were able to distinguish between children with or without ASD diagnosis, thanks to a new saliva based biomarker panel. Researchers report the test can be used in children as young as 18 month, assisting in early diagnosis of autism.
Source: Bioscribe.
Newly published research shows that a saliva-based biomarker panel and associated algorithm could improve the ability to accurately identify children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) in its earliest stages, announced Quadrant Biosciences Inc. In a study of more than 450 children ages 18 months to 6 years, researchers demonstrated that a panel of 32 small RNAs could differentiate children with autism from children exhibiting typical development or non-ASD developmental delay with 85% accuracy. This test accuracy was achieved both during the model development and during validation of the test in a separate set of children.
The publication, entitled “Validation of a salivary RNA test for childhood autism spectrum disorder,” was published online in Frontiers in Genetics by researchers Steven Hicks, M.D., Ph.D., of the Pennsylvania State College of Medicine and Frank Middleton, Ph.D., of SUNY Upstate Medical University in collaboration with scientists from Quadrant Biosciences.
Following a pilot study demonstrating that many of these RNA elements could be detected in the saliva of children with ASD, the researchers determined that saliva-based testing could provide the means to broadly interrogate genomic, physiologic, microbiome, and environmental factors implicated in ASD in a single, non-invasive, high-throughput analysis.
“Growing evidence suggests that autism arises from interactions between a child’s genes and the environment. This study measured factors that may control interactions between genes and the environment, especially the microbiome,” said Dr. Hicks. “Though children with autism have diverse genetic backgrounds, we found that a set of 32 RNA factors in their saliva could accurately distinguish them from peers without autism. Given this array of ASD risk factors, we believe a ‘poly-omics’ RNA-based approach that integrates genetic, epigenetic, and metagenomics methods would be well suited to the development of an objective biomarker-based test.”
The Study
The multi-center study included 456 children recruited during the past three years. The authors compared saliva samples from 238 children with ASD to 218 children without ASD (including 84 children with developmental delay and 134 with typical development). Levels of human and bacterial RNAs were measured in the saliva samples using comprehensive next-generation sequencing. The top RNAs were identified using robust machine-learning algorithms from the first 372 children and then validated in the remaining 84 samples that were not used in the machine learning. Notably, this validation set also included samples collected from children at the University of California, Irvine, to verify that the RNA algorithm performed accurately in samples from different geographic regions.
Need for Earlier Autism Diagnosis
Screening for autism typically relies on a parent-based questionnaire called the Modified Checklist for Autism in Toddlers Revised (MCHAT-R). Children with a positive MCHAT-R score are generally referred for diagnostic evaluation. However, due to the high number of false-positive results on the MCHAT-R, wait times for autism evaluation often exceed one year. While diagnosis is possible in children as young as 24 months, the average age of ASD diagnosis in the United States today is greater than 4 years. Early diagnosis is important because intensive behavioral therapy has been shown to improve the symptoms of autism, and children benefit more from such intervention the earlier it is started.
Daniel Coury, M.D., Professor of Clinical Pediatrics and Psychiatry at The Ohio State University College of Medicine and a member of the Section of Developmental & Behavioral Pediatrics at Nationwide Children’s Hospital, sees the benefit of this RNA biomarker-based test in a clinical setting. “Often autism-specific interventions are delayed while awaiting a diagnosis. It frequently takes months to obtain an autism evaluation due to the large number of referrals, many of whom will not receive a diagnosis of autism,” he explained. “A test which can separate children who have screened M-CHAT-positive into high likelihood of autism or low likelihood of autism could help streamline waitlists and permit earlier diagnosis and enrollment in autism treatment.”
Dr. Middleton from SUNY Upstate Medical University agreed. “The ability to accurately discriminate between children with autism and their peers with non-ASD developmental delay is of paramount importance in the field. While the algorithm is not designed as a screening tool, it can provide valuable information in children with a positive MCHAT-R screen, over 80% of whom will not have ASD. In this way, it can be used to prioritize specialist referral or to provide an objective aid to an autism diagnosis.”
Summary: A new study reports the rhythm of your breathing can influence neural activity that enhances memory recall and emotional judgement.
Source: Northwestern University.
Breathing is not just for oxygen; it’s now linked to brain function and behavior.
Northwestern Medicine scientists have discovered for the first time that the rhythm of breathing creates electrical activity in the human brain that enhances emotional judgments and memory recall.
These effects on behavior depend critically on whether you inhale or exhale and whether you breathe through the nose or mouth.
In the study, individuals were able to identify a fearful face more quickly if they encountered the face when breathing in compared to breathing out. Individuals also were more likely to remember an object if they encountered it on the inhaled breath than the exhaled one. The effect disappeared if breathing was through the mouth.
“One of the major findings in this study is that there is a dramatic difference in brain activity in the amygdala and hippocampus during inhalation compared with exhalation,” said lead author Christina Zelano, assistant professor of neurology at Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine. “When you breathe in, we discovered you are stimulating neurons in the olfactory cortex, amygdala and hippocampus, all across the limbic system.”
The study was published Dec. 6 in the Journal of Neuroscience.
The senior author is Jay Gottfried, professor of neurology at Feinberg.
Northwestern scientists first discovered these differences in brain activity while studying seven patients with epilepsy who were scheduled for brain surgery. A week prior to surgery, a surgeon implanted electrodes into the patients’ brains in order to identify the origin of their seizures. This allowed scientists to acquire electro-physiological data directly from their brains. The recorded electrical signals showed brain activity fluctuated with breathing. The activity occurs in brain areas where emotions, memory and smells are processed.
This discovery led scientists to ask whether cognitive functions typically associated with these brain areas — in particular fear processing and memory — could also be affected by breathing.
The amygdala is strongly linked to emotional processing, in particular fear-related emotions. So scientists asked about 60 subjects to make rapid decisions on emotional expressions in the lab environment while recording their breathing. Presented with pictures of faces showing expressions of either fear or surprise, the subjects had to indicate, as quickly as they could, which emotion each face was expressing.
When faces were encountered during inhalation, subjects recognized them as fearful more quickly than when faces were encountered during exhalation. This was not true for faces expressing surprise. These effects diminished when subjects performed the same task while breathing through their mouths. Thus the effect was specific to fearful stimuli during nasal breathing only.
In an experiment aimed at assessing memory function — tied to the hippocampus — the same subjects were shown pictures of objects on a computer screen and told to remember them. Later, they were asked to recall those objects. Researchers found that recall was better if the images were encountered during inhalation.
The findings imply that rapid breathing may confer an advantage when someone is in a dangerous situation, Zelano said.
“If you are in a panic state, your breathing rhythm becomes faster,” Zelano said. “As a result you’ll spend proportionally more time inhaling than when in a calm state. Thus, our body’s innate response to fear with faster breathing could have a positive impact on brain function and result in faster response times to dangerous stimuli in the environment.”
Another potential insight of the research is on the basic mechanisms of meditation or focused breathing. “When you inhale, you are in a sense synchronizing brain oscillations across the limbic network,” Zelano noted.